Okay, so I am here with my tia, Lupe Valdez, and it's July 22nd, 2019.
So we were just talking about kind of my project and stuff.
And so really for this interview, I have two simple questions.
And the first one is...
If you, well, actually, let me start off.
If you could tell me your name and age.
Oh, okay.
I'm Lupe Trujillo Valdez.
I'm 74 years old.
Okay.
And where were you born?
I was born in Dinuba, California, in the San Joaquin Valley.
So, but grew up in Cutler.
Cutler.
Great.
There was no hospital I was born.
At a clinic.
Oh, I thought you were going to say in the house.
No, no, no.
I think I'm the only one that was born actually not at home.
And Sarah, I think we both were.
I was just thinking about my grandma and she was telling us about when Grandma Victoriana would have babies, right?
And that
her grandma Kaya would like take her out of the house or something so that she wouldn't get scared of having kids.
Well, you know, your grandma was, well, she was old enough to be my mother, you know, that the age gap between the oldest and the youngest.
But I think she was embarrassed, especially when she, the last two, especially with me coming because the fact that, you know, she was a teenager, your grandma,
And your great-grandma was still having kids.
So it was a little jarring for her, I think, you know.
It's not that common anymore because people don't have large families anymore.
So the gap there, like with nine children, of course, then you're going to see the age difference.
Yeah.
So, okay, and you spent most or all of your life in California, right?
Correct.
All right.
So the first kind of like main question that I have is, do you see yourself as a participant of the Chicano movement that happened in the 60s and 70s?
Oh, of course, most definitely, yes.
I am a product of that.
And how would you, so how would you describe, like, how was, what was your participation like?
How did you get into it?
Well, you know, it's interesting because, you know, growing up in the San Joaquin Valley, especially in the 1950s,
40s or 50s uh you know you you wanted to assimilate as much as possible only only because you didn't know your history the history our history or latino history or chicano history and it wasn't called chicano at the time um it wasn't um there was nothing we could identify with so growing up i remember
dyeing my hair blonde because, and I didn't like my name, Lupe, it's too Mexican, you know?
So it was really a feeling of not self-hatred because I don't think I really, but not knowing your identity and where you come from, other than you know that your parents are farm workers and they were struggling, you know, to raise nine children.
but I always admired my father who was able to, and my mom especially, to be able to raise nine children as farm workers and be able to own their own home and, you know, have food on the table and a roof over our head.
And so being the youngest, I think it was the beneficiary of not having to quit school in order for my younger siblings, which I did not have, to help out with the family.
I think all my sisters and
um, weren't actually forced, but suggested they, they help the family and start working.
So I was, you know, I'm very fortunate to, there was the youngest of the nine children to do that.
Um, so I'm grateful to that, but, uh, growing up, um, we didn't,
We didn't really, never went out to dinner.
I mean, that's like unheard of.
So our social life was really just the compadres, my parents' compadres coming over, having dinner at our house, or we would go over there.
So it wasn't until I went to Fresno State, actually the very first time that...
I even became aware that there was not even a political movement, but something that I could identify with.
It was during the March to Sacramento, Jessica Buccino performed in our hometown of Cutler.
I remember coming home, I was going to College of the Sequoies at the time, and I remember coming home, and my mother was telling me about what had happened that afternoon when the farm workers came, or the crew that went ahead to set up for the nightly meetings was there in Cutler Park.
And my mother happened to be there with her grandmothers, and I don't know why, because she never really went out that much.
But she...
She was there when they were setting up and there were two growers, well, one grower who was Mexicano, one, no, why don't I say Mexican-American because he didn't speak any English or Spanish.
But he wanted to intimidate Luis.
I didn't know it was Luis at the time.
She described this, my mom described this person who, I guess the grower,
thought that Luis was illiterate because he told him, what are you doing here?
And, you know, and thought that he couldn't respond to him because he wouldn't be able to speak English.
And of course, Luis is so eloquent.
And my mother described it...
And she didn't understand what he was saying, but just in his tone and the manner in which he spoke.
all of a sudden she said, he spoke with such beautiful words and she didn't know what it was, but she stood up to, he stood up to, to the grower.
And so that night we went to the, to see the performance.
And that was the first time I'd ever seen live theater.
I had never in my life, even in high school, we never went to plays.
Never went, we went to the Mexican movies.
That's our former military.
entertainment growing up.
But that night when I saw it, I just, it immediately was like, oh, they're speaking to me.
I could identify exactly what they were saying.
I mean, and they were acting on stage and singing and it was such an incredible experience.
And we had some farm workers stay with us that evening.
And so,
So the next morning, they all took off, went to Sanger, I believe the next stop was, and a group of us went to see them perform, the Teatro Capricino performed the next night.
And it was just this feeling that I finally felt I belonged somewhere, that I could identify with everyone and everything, and that it had something to say, and they were fighting for farm worker rights.
My, I don't know if you know this, but your grandpa, your great grandpa Lorenzo and my mother, your grandma, your great grandma, uh, were in the, um, probably your grandma probably talked to you about it.
Uh, uh, when they were in Ventura in Fillmore, they were in the lemon strike and they were in a labor camp and it was during the war.
And my mom and dad or my dad went on strike and all the people that were living there in that camp went on strike.
Well, the government came in because they said the war, they needed the produce.
And so they broke the strike.
And so they told all the farm workers that had been living there that they could go back.
And my mother's refused.
She says, I'm not, I'm not going back there.
And that's why we moved from Fillmore.
to Cutler.
Oh, wow.
Because she didn't want to stay there anymore.
And your Tia Lala and Grandma, and they all lived together in the camp, and Tia Lala went to Dinuba, and that's where my mother decided, okay, we're closer to her sister.
So...
So there was this sense with your grandpa Lorenzo and your grandma Trujillo, some political activism before that.
So with farm workers coming and striking, they were sympathetic to that.
And so invited some of the farm workers to come and stay with us that night in Cutler, even though we didn't have that much room.
Nonetheless, they stayed with us.
So I went the next day to see them and sang the group, and then it wasn't until about six months later that we heard that the theater was reforming an Alfonso church in Fresno.
And so a group of us, and at that time I had already transferred from COS, College of Sequoia, to Fresno State.
And so I was there taking...
We went to see them and that's when I met Luis officially for the first time because we hadn't talked before and he said he was teaching a class at Fresno State.
So he told us we were a group of young Chicanas that were there.
We didn't call ourselves Chicanas then because we were just bonding together and so we went to
We went to St.
Alphonsus to see them perform when we saw
Bernabé for the first time, and they did the short actos.
And then he told us that he was going to be teaching a class at Fresno State under the experimental college.
It wasn't even Chicano studies, there was no Chicano department, there was nothing.
It was called La Raza studies, and it was just a class.
And so a group of us took the class, and we had to drive to Del Rey
in order to take the class.
He did teach one, you know, just most of the classes were done in Del Rey.
And so I used to drive down there and start, I have to blow my nose, excuse me.
Yeah.
Is this taking too long of a description?
No, it's good.
It's great.
I was going to say that that story you were telling about Grandma and Grandpa Trujillo, that my mom had mentioned something about that, that when the grape strike happened, that she was like, I just remember there being a lot of like kind of division in the family because my grandparents were supportive of them.
And then you had, you know, some of my tios who were contractors.
Mm hmm.
and uh and she's like and then my aunts would come in and it was just she's like i didn't know what was going on i was yeah it was very uh it was very divided between our family because we had two um contractors uh i think your grandpa was a contractor too wasn't he yeah actually i don't remember anyway tío lupe was and uh but um anyway he um
So, you know, it was a political.
When Lisa and I got married, this is jumping forward, you know, my family came to the wedding, of course.
It wasn't a Catholic wedding, and so some of my family members left after the ceremony.
My mom and dad stayed, Fidel stayed, but the majority of my family members left.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, I mean, so kind of the reason I was bringing up my mom's story about that is because she didn't explain why they were supportive, you know, why your parents were supportive of the farm workers.
Yeah.
So I'm glad that you kind of cleared that up, that they had been involved in something in Ventura.
I appreciate that.
Can I also ask you about, so this time that Teatro Campesino is coming to Cutler, where you first see them, so you're talking about this is them marching with the UFW from Delano to Sacramento?
Right, 1965.
1965, okay.
And then you said you were already in school?
Yes.
Or at Fresno State?
I graduated in 1963 from Rossi Union High School, and then I had gone to College of Sequoias.
So I was a student there.
I think it was... Where is that at, College of Sequoias?
In Visalia.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
So that's the junior college there.
So I went there two years, worked my way through as a bookkeeper.
Mm-hmm.
And how did you end up even at that college?
Well, because Celia had gone there.
And, you know, I never took college prep courses in high school because I never really thought of myself going on to a four-year college.
It wasn't something...
that anybody expected of you?
None of my family members.
Celia was the honor student, and she took classes, and so she went on to COS, and I thought, well, I'll try it.
It was really because of her that I went to school.
I took classes, not transferable classes, because I figured I was only going to go there two years.
I was going to go to business.
That's why I worked as a bookkeeper in a hardware store in Visalia.
And then I thought,
I can do this.
It's not impossible.
And so I thought, you know what?
Maybe I should transfer to Fresno State.
And Celia was going to go to Fresno.
She was already at Fresno State.
And so we ended up going together.
And I think that helped too, is having the support or... Or like some kind of role model.
Yes.
Yeah.
And this was 1965, you said?
No, this was in 1967.
Oh, okay.
That you went to Fresno State?
Yes.
Okay.
Well, I actually graduated in 67 from Fresno State.
So you were there before?
Yeah.
Interesting.
And Celia graduated in 68.
So, no, wait a minute.
She graduated in 67.
I graduated in 68.
Oh, okay.
And she's a little older.
So you were kind of talking about your introduction into the Chicano movement and that you had gone to Fresno State and took this class with Louise.
Well, actually, the classes that I was taking, I was introduced to Cary McBrillian's book, a book.
Oh, God, it's in my mind here.
Did you say Carrie McWilliams?
Yes.
Let me book it up.
Oh, my God.
That was the one that was pivotal.
When I read that book, it changed my life completely.
North from Mexico.
And it was the first time that anybody had ever written anything about the history of the
of Mexicanos in the United States.
And I think the teatro came up with the coin.
Well, that's where I learned from the Teatro Campesino was Chicano, the word Chicano.
And I'm not sure whether in Northern Mexico I never mentioned Chicano because it wasn't a book that was written.
It was written, I think, in the 1940s.
But it talked about the Blasero program and talked about, you know, the inequities here in the United States of how Mexicanos were being treated and how we've been treated in the past.
And so it just gave a whole, you know, history on us here in the United States.
And...
So that, of course, made me more political.
And of course it was during the Vietnam War.
And so we got all active about that.
And I started performing with the Giante Campesino in 1968 and toured with the company.
So what was your, um, in those kind of early days, like what was your role in the teatro?
Were you acting?
Were you helping out in the background?
Organizing?
Um, I think everybody that's ever worked at the jazz has acted in, in, in some form of capacity.
Uh, you know, uh, Lisa and I will be celebrating 50 years this year of marriage.
So it's been a long road here.
Um,
But, you know, when I started, you know, we got married in 69.
But I had been performing, acting with a company from the very beginning.
That was the key role I did.
I was one of the original Miss Jimenez in Los Vendidos and
So we toured all over the state with that.
So that was my first introduction to the company as a performer.
We didn't call ourselves actors.
It was not a profession.
It was more of a political.
Oh, he said I fell in love with Lisa's politics first before I fell in love with him.
It was just that he was one of the prime movers of the Chicano movement at the time.
And so how do you see that participation, being part of the teatro,
How do you see that as being, like you just said that you saw Luis as a prime mover of the Chicano movement.
Like what was it about that group being a part of that group that tied in with the movement in general?
Well, you know, because after I graduated from college, I mean, I worked as a teacher in the west side of Fresno.
And although it was, for me, that was my intention.
I had told Louise, I'll probably get married and live a middle-class life.
That was, I thought that was what I was geared to do.
I mean, coming from the background that I came from, that was the only opportunity
not the only option, but I thought that was my only option at the time.
And then he said something like, well, we'll have to do something about it.
We'll have to get married.
And that was his proposal.
But I think for me, I've always, you know, it, it was a,
A life that I wanted politically, and it still is.
That hasn't changed, especially now with the politics of the country, the way it's going.
And you understand.
I mean, going back, it was almost not the same.
It was you felt the need to do something.
You felt the need to speak out, to protest, to...
politicized to, not politicized, that was a term used then, but I mean, to inform people about what was happening, not to be complacent.
And so I always thought that that was my key role in that is to be able to contribute to that.
And when you're young, you're able to do that.
You're able to, you have the time and the energy
to be able to do that.
And you're, I don't want to say naive, but you're ready to do anything that it takes in order to improve conditions for those around you.
It does for now.
Hopefully that still works.
Okay.
I think it's going to.
Yeah.
So, yeah, it was a different time.
I sometimes get a little disheartened by what's happening now and feeling the need to do something.
And at this point in my life, I'm 74, so it's not like I can just get up on a bus and go to the border and protest.
And I'm not sure that
I don't know what the solutions are now.
So the only thing is I know from experience that this too will pass.
So it's not the end of the world.
But we have to be vigilant and we have to be aware of what is happening around us.
And you know, you get to a point where you get more spiritual too.
I know that having lived this long now, that I can't function without my belief in a power greater than myself.
And so I've had to deal with
lot of issues not just on the political basis of being Chicano but just being as a human being and we struggle when we live and we have challenges in the world that in our life that we have to see and I'm thankful you know that I have my health right now there are things that I'm thankful for that my family is as well that I
I don't have to have that wall of anger and anxiety about what's happening around me, but at the same time, I will support anyone or anything, you know?
Yeah.
Um, and so I guess maybe, um, like, how did you see
How did you see your participation with Teatro as doing that or like doing something?
What was it that you guys were doing?
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
Well, you know, Teatro was so young when I first joined the company.
I mean, it was like four years old, you know.
So at the very beginning, there was the excitement of all that, you know, when you're in your 20s.
Yeah.
that propelled you to do all kinds of different things.
And it was an era that was different than now.
You don't see political groups performing in colleges and universities as we did.
We have a theater now.
And, you know, I see a lot of young groups that are still doing it, and I love it that they have the energy to do that.
I truly believe that we did...
We were able to touch people's lives when we did.
I know now everything now is turning from Chicano to Latino X. It's kind of like, I think every generation has to create titles for themselves.
I don't know if Chicano will last.
I know that it fit us at the time.
I'm not insisting that we be called Chicanos.
If you want to be called Latino X or the one that got me the other day was Chicanx.
I can't even say it.
But you know that everyone, every generation is entitled to identify who they are.
And if that motivates them, and my table is the cat sits on it.
I try to clean it, but it's like...
I thought it was salt or something.
No, no, no, no.
It's, it's, it's, I don't know what it's, uh, yeah.
She's so old.
She's like 14 years.
We got her.
She's outside.
She's, uh, and she's losing all her teeth and she has some babas and...
Oh, my God, this poor little cat, you know.
I'll tell you a story about the cat because she was a stray cat.
There was a family down the street that had like, oh, and she had about 20 cats.
And when she passed away, they all scattered, you know, throughout the neighborhood.
And Tomasa was outside here, and Monica came.
And she didn't tell me, but she went to the store and got cat food and started feeding her.
So we said that, and then I bought a litter box just in case.
And now she sleeps in the bed.
No, she doesn't.
We said that if Obama won the first time,
Then she could come in.
So as soon as the election was, you know, he won, we opened the door, and she's never left.
But that was 15 years ago.
So she's at least that old, and I think, you know, she could be older.
Yeah.
Yeah, so anyway.
Oh, no, she's 10 years old, yeah.
My cat mama passed away two years ago.
She was 19 and a half, almost 20 years.
20 years old yeah little baby yeah anyway um okay so it's interesting because we're just talking about um like what role did the teatro play in the chicano movement right
And, uh, and I think you had kind of said that it was bringing a message or something like that, right?
Oh, most definitely.
Yes.
Uh, all the, the short one act plays, well, you, we call them authors, uh, you know, and you're familiar with them.
Um, uh, I think it brought a message.
It is, but you know, I think that for us, it was always a question of the professionality of it, uh,
I think our productions were, I mean, I'm sure your mom has said, you know, like Luis was a, I mean, you know, from the very beginning, it was rehearsal, rehearsal, rehearsal.
I mean, it wasn't just putting it up there.
We had to do it in precision because most of us were not professional actors.
And so it really depended more on the body movement.
than anything else because otherwise you couldn't.
Our signature piece is La Carfa de los Sasquatches, which is
I don't know if you're familiar with it.
Have you ever seen it?
I'm sure you've seen it because your dad was in, played the Pelado.
But I don't know if you know this, but this was a song that my father, your great-grandpa, used to sing to us.
El Corrido de... Well, it wasn't Corrido de Jesús Pelado.
It was El Corrido de... What was...
I have the recording of my dad singing it.
Luis recorded him singing it and based on that recording we developed La Carpa de los Sasquatches and that's really our signature piece because it really is theatrically it's I think one of our best pieces we've ever done as an acto because it's so stylized and
And the direction of it is, I mean, it's still used today and could be used today.
We revived it a couple of years ago.
But that is based on your grandpa's singing that song.
And so it's a song about somebody like... No, it's somebody coming around,
Anyway, the song, it talks about this migrant who's leaving his home in Mexico and by himself crossing the border and
and they tell him that he can't cross because he doesn't have any money.
His money is no good.
It's from Mexico, but then if you give him a mojada, he'll let you pass, and so he comes to the United States, and he always wants to go, and he sends money back to Mexico to his mother, and then his mother, of course, dies.
This is all part of the lyrics in the song, and my dad used to sing it really slow, and
But then when we started doing the production, the beat was much faster.
But it does tell about the immigration of what happens at the border.
And literally, they used to wash them down like cattle.
They used to cross the border.
So that piece in itself, we toured all over the country.
We toured it in Europe.
And so it became one of our...
are pieces that is still done today.
So... So you basically took a song... A ballad.
A ballad and then kind of put it to... Recreate it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh, that's so interesting.
Yeah, yeah.
So, and it came from my dad.
So that's, you know, so that's the other thread from it.
Yeah.
I think I sent it to your... I think I sent you a copy to...
Of him singing it?
Yeah.
I can send it to you.
I feel like I've heard it, and I don't know from whom.
Maybe Teresa or something.
I think I sent it to Teresa or somebody in your family.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because your grandma wasn't going to be able to.
Yeah.
Oh, my God.
Hi, mijo.
Hey.
I'm good.
I'm here with Rocio.
We're doing an interview.
Oh, okay.
I'll talk to you later.
Okay.
Bye-bye.
He's an ally.
He's doing a stage reading.
I think it's this Thursday.
So.
Yeah, so that's interesting.
I just kind of want to go back to that point about the message, right?
And it reminds me, because I interviewed my dad too.
So, so far I've interviewed my mom and my dad, right?
And my dad...
The way that he described what Teatro Campesino was doing in those early days was the same thing.
Like, you know, hey, we're organizing, we're agitating, we're getting a message out, right?
And we're taking it to different communities.
And my mom had the same kind of response too.
That we were doing something.
Well, you know, uh, I think we all felt the need to do something.
And, um, and I think because, uh, especially not having had, not knowing, but our history, it was important, I think for all of us, I think to identify with something, um, and to be able to do something about it and to spread that message.
Um,
But you know, the pendulum always swings.
It's always, it never stays thin.
It just, you know, different eras in, something happens, and you hope that the earth that you, the seeds that you planted keep growing, that they don't die.
So you keep having to water them.
And of course weeds are always growing, so you have to always weed your garden.
So I think for us, I think it's a new generation that needs to come up to the forefront.
But I think what we did then was, you know, they always say, look at your past, but don't stare at it.
I don't go back to that time and say, God, I wish I was back then.
It is what it,
it was, it is what it is, it was, and, um, it's part of history.
And you hope that, you know, uh, people evolve to another level.
Uh, I'm getting to the point in my life, you know, um, you know, I'm facing the third act of my life now, you know, so I look at the past as something like back there that is, um, is a, yes, it's a part of me, but it's not me anymore.
Um,
I, you know, I've been very fortunate, I've been very blessed, and I'm very thankful I'm getting to that point in my life.
I, you know, you asked me what I was doing then.
I started as a performer, you know, and then because I was raising my kids, that was my primary focus.
I really did that.
It was communal in that sense, so I never felt not engaged at all, but my
primary focus was raising my my three boys uh and when they became you know were able to walk and do all things they were part of it uh they performed with us they traveled all over with us um and i was a bookkeeper for the organization this third which is really surprising this third act in my life is as i've become a costume designer and it's it's an interesting because it wasn't something that i had
This is my intention.
It's what I was going to, my dream that I was one day going to be this.
And to be able to design for the Marte Aperforum was unexpected.
It wasn't anything that I had, you know.
It's something that I love doing.
And I started doing it here out of necessity with a company.
Like everything else, everything else has always been a question of necessity.
Who can come up to the, who can do this?
Can you do this?
Can you do that?
Yes, I'll take it on.
And so we were designing for the revival of Zuzu the first time that we did it here in San Juan.
And what happened is that our costume designer was going through some
health issues mental issues really because she was diagnosed schizophrenic and or bipolar and so she wasn't able to finish so I ended up having to nurse her to get you know help her along with it and ended up having to do it not the best thing because I wasn't hadn't done it you know I was just really there to help her but in the process of doing I loved it I loved
being able to put clothes on, you know, to look at colors and patterns and what fits on a stage and what doesn't.
And so when Luis asked me to do the costumes for Valley of the Heart here in San Juan, of course, I just, yes, why not?
And then when we did it in LA, of course, then I also did it there.
So based on that, I actually got a couple of offers
outside of San Juan and L.A., in Chicago and in Texas.
But at this point in my life, I'm not ready to... It's... That life is... I know what it's like, you know, and being away from my family and being away from home.
Yeah.
I don't... It's not something... I love doing it here and I love doing it with my family, but to be independent and going off somewhere by myself to do it,
It's not something that I... That's not what you're doing it for.
You're not doing it because you're trying to, like... Establish a career.
Make a career out of it.
Right, right.
Yeah, right.
Maybe if I had started, you know...
But even so, at this point, I'm just grateful that I got to have this opportunity.
I think like everything else, we try to hold on to things as if things are static and changing.
It's like trying to hold on to water.
You can't hold on to water.
So all these experiences in your life, whatever you've had, they are part of your life, but you can't hold on to any of it.
Yeah.
we're all facing death.
And, and so I've seen too many of my friends now and my own family.
And it's, it's, you know, you, you just have to say, you know, God, thank you for this day.
I'm thankful that I'm, you know, I can walk.
I'm thankful I can see I, you know, so all these things you have a greater appreciation for now.
I wish I had,
Not wish.
I can never go back.
I'm just disgrateful.
I can't say anything more.
I miss having my family closer.
I miss having that connection.
I loved when all my sisters would come to visit grandma here in San Juan.
Oh, yeah.
You know, we take all these things for granted.
That is, they're always going to be there.
And they're not.
They're gone before you know it.
And they're gone before you oblique or not.
And you look at time, and it does seem, I was just thinking about, I've been very melancholy for the last couple of days.
And I was just thinking,
Well, I'll tell you why it was melancholy because we just got word from the mission that we weren't, that we, they, they cemented the pews.
Uh, they got new pews in the mission and they cemented the pews.
And so, um, it's going to be difficult for us to be doing our Christmas shows there any longer, but the way, the manner that it felt that we couldn't do it was not very good.
So just the whole idea of a tradition that's happened for over 40 years ends.
But that's life.
Yeah.
You know, that's like a death in a family.
It's like, you know, you lose someone.
Your grandma once gave me this little tiny booklet.
It was just a little book.
She used to work for the medical visiting people, and she would work for the health department.
Anyway, this book, it says Family Ties and Bind.
Have you read it?
No.
It's a little booklet she gave me, and it's like a little mobile.
And we're part of this mobile, this family.
And when one piece falls off, it takes a while for it to balance again, a little balance.
And that's how we're tied together.
It's like we're a part of this mobile, and that we have to adjust to
someone you lose in your family.
Well, it's kind of like that with the mission.
It's like losing, not that it's equivalent to a family member passing.
But there's a relationship there.
It's over 40 years.
And so it feels like another death.
And so you think, okay, now how do I adjust to that?
And you have to.
You adjust to all these things in life.
And we don't know how.
I love that poem by Netza Walcoyal.
No para siempre en la tierra, solo un poco aquí.
Yeah.
And, you know, that's really what life is.
Right.
We're just here for a short... And it just feels like a blink of an eye.
I was thinking of my mother, too.
That's... Because my dad was... We were doing the weekend show there in the mission.
I don't know if you remember.
You were too young.
Yeah.
This was...
My dad was... Well, he died in 92, so it would have been... 82.
82, I'm sorry.
82, 92.
My mom died in 95, so it's 82.
So that was... That's... What is it?
13.
Huh?
13 years?
Is that what you're... No, no.
Between the...
Oh, no, no, 13.
No, but since he died, it would be 38 years.
Oh, to today.
Yes.
38?
Yeah.
My mother, 24 years.
And yet, you know, when you think about it, it just feels like yesterday.
Yeah.
You know?
And that's what time is.
Oh, we were talking about Chicana stuff.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, no, this is good.
This is good, too.
And, I mean, it's good because you can kind of see that same kind of, I mean, it's a philosophy, right?
And you can kind of see that in your approach to, you know, to your costume designing.
And, you know, something happened, you had to step in there.
Mm-hmm.
And, you know, you found something that you love to do.
Yeah.
Or, you know, you're having to what you thought you could rely on didn't, you know, turned out that you couldn't rely on that.
And so you have to kind of readjust, readjust.
Yeah.
And I think that's about it.
uh, they say AA is about attitude adjustment.
I think that's what it stands for.
That's what somebody said is the attitude adjustment.
And I think that that's kind of, um, uh, that's really, really, uh, life.
You have to do, it's an attitude adjustment.
I started going to Al-Anon, uh, about, um,
12 years ago, 13 years ago.
And it's given me so much working on myself because I thought I was, well, you know, I grew up in an alcoholic home, you know.
And so, did you stop it?
No.
No, do you want me to?
No, no, no, no, it's okay.
But anyway, it's helped me tremendously to work on myself.
And, you know, I never had the luxury of, you know, therapy or any of those things.
Right.
It is a form of therapy in a way, but it's like working on yourself, identifying yourself.
You know, I think when you're young,
And you're still being molded as to how you're going to live your life.
You really don't know because things change for you from one time or another, something that you have to readjust your life.
Yeah.
And so it's a question.
It really is trying to find your balance at all times.
And it doesn't matter how old you are or how young you are.
You're always trying to find your balance.
Yeah.
So let me just kind of ask one more question about the Chicano movement stuff and then we'll move into the mestizaje stuff.
But so kind of to go back to that idea of, you know, the Teatro Campesino thing.
bringing a message, right?
And in many ways, I kind of connect this to like what you guys were doing and the message that you guys were bringing into different Chicano communities is what, you know, departments like Chicano studies or, you know, ethnic studies are doing today in the academy.
Mm-hmm.
And so I wanted to know if you had anything, like, did you see what you guys were doing as part of kind of like an educational mission or not a mission, but that that's what you guys were doing was kind of spreading, spreading the word.
About what it means to be Chicano, about the history, about having a particular identity that you guys have created or that, you know, that is being created in the Chicano movement.
Well, you know, when we first started, when I first started taking a class at Fresno State and Luis was teaching it, there was no books at the time.
There was no authors that did a published book that you could say referenced this.
What his first class did in La Raza, it was called La Raza,
was that he mimeographed a lot of the things that hadn't been published, like Rofo Lanaya's... I mean, a lot of these that hadn't been published, they were sent to Luis, and he mimeographed them and became part of this anthology they put together with Stan Steiner.
Is that published somewhere?
It's...
Somebody have a copy of it?
Oh, yeah.
We have a copy upstairs.
Oh, you do?
Oh, yeah.
Because it's out of print.
Yeah.
So I'll bring them down to you so you can see them.
But, yeah, I don't even know if they're available.
They should be available in colleges and universities, especially where... But that was the very first book, Anthology of Mexican-American Literature, that was ever published.
And that was...
So he mimeographed a lot of the things that became part of the book and was part of the class that he taught.
So it was at the frontier of when things were happening because nothing else was happening at the time.
There was no Chicano movement, theater movement, first, that you might say, when they went to...
to crusade for justice in Denver, Colorado.
It was the first youth conference to take place.
And that was in 19, I believe it, that was in 1966, 67.
And that's when they came up with the, what was it?
I'm not a historian.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
And so that was put together by a group, by committee that came together there at the youth conference in Denver with Corky.
And of course, that's when they had met Corky on the national tour.
They went from Delano after the march.
So, yeah, you're going back.
That's interesting.
It's like a time capsule that goes back, you know, like, what is it, 50 years?
Yeah.
We're talking 50 years.
50 years.
So.
At least.
At least more than that, yeah.
It'll be 55 years since Delano, the mainstream.
Yeah.
A grape stripe, yeah.
I think that happened in 64.
Yeah.
But I mean, the March to Sacramento was in 65.
Anyway, was it 65?
Somewhere around there.
Yeah, it was $60.
To be honest, I don't know.
I don't have the internet yet.
Oh, you don't?
No, I'll get it when we're done.
Okay.
Part of the reason I wanted to ask you about that is because I think it was my mom who mentioned that
that not only were you guys performing like in communities, but that there were maybe like invitations to perform in universities or from different departments and universities.
And so, and I think she mentioned something about like that you guys would make videos and give them to, or I don't know about give them, but yeah.
that they would be provided to those universities?
Actually, in those days, there was no video.
It was actually 16-millimeter film.
And that's... I Am Joaquin was really... We used to sell those in the big reel-to-reels, the big 16-millimeter... Yeah, because that was the only thing we had.
There was no... Before there was video, there was VHS.
And then it was...
DVDs.
But in those times, the only way of community, there was no way.
We didn't have the internet then.
So we had, it was to transfer, you know, we used to rent these.
And we did I Am Joaquin in Fresno.
It was George Ballas who filmed it.
It was part of Jose Montoya's poem.
Well, no, that's Little Louie.
We used to do it as an acto with live music and reading Corky's poem.
And so George Bala says this would be a great film, short film.
So he shot it in his kitchen by using rear projection with like a window.
You could see the slide and anyway,
Very arcade.
And that's how it was shot, so that you could have sort of like a movement, because there were all his photographs.
George Ballons' photographs with the music, and of course we did the narration on it.
But yeah, that was done in Fresno, and I believe that was done in 69, 68, 69.
And yeah, but it was, we used to sell them and rent them
to colleges and universities and libraries yeah so that's interesting to me too because that's another part of what I'm going over in my dissertation is how did how did like some of the ideas from the Chicano movement become entrenched or
part of academic discourse on you know on these things well because there's no materials available that there was so so we had to create not only the books but the films and the short films that were created actually uh i am walking uh the short film is is in the library of congress now is one of
Luis will tell you.
That's, you know, he has dates.
But that one, and we did Little Louie.
I've never heard of that one.
And Louie, not Little Louie.
Little Louie is actually a short film that our sons did with their dad because he describes the story of how he got involved into theater.
And he tells that.
So it's called Little Louie.
But El Luis, Jose Montoya, we also did that as a... Well, it's recorded as a 45.
It wasn't done in a video, but that was a recording that we did.
But the short film was that... And then, of course, we did the Pastorella for PBS and El Corrido, Passion of Revolution.
Tales of Passion and Revolution that won a Peabody Award.
So a lot of that, all that educational material probably was based out of what the Jephthah did.
Okay.
Let me see.
I'm just trying to think if there's anything else I want to ask about that before we move on.
No.
I got through all these questions.
um okay so the next the second question i have is about messy sawhead are you familiar at all with messy sawhead that idea what do you know about it what do i know other than then uh then uh the group that came uh
No.
I'm not quite sure what your definition of mestizaje is.
Mestizaje is kind of like the umbrella term.
Another word you might use for it is mestizo.
What does that mean to be mestizo?
Do you have any understanding of what that is, mestizo?
Yes.
Well, I think that part of the whole idea with the Chicano movement was really identity and finding the Indian and the Spanish is the mestizaje.
The mestizo was born out of the combination of indigenous America identifying with it.
You know, it's so complex that...
These are all terms that people use.
You know, the bottom line is we're all human beings, you know, whether we want to call ourselves Mexican, Chicano, Latino X, Mestizo, whatever it is, it's the bottom line.
We're only here for a short time in this life.
And so if it helps to identify with it, that's fine.
but it's not who I am.
I mean, I think I'm more than a term or I'm spirit.
So you would say that when you hear that term mestizo or mestizaje, that it doesn't necessarily say anything about how you identify, but you know, like everything,
In life, things change, and even the way you think about things, you know, how you see, you know, you can see, any person can see something totally different.
I can tell you one thing and you will not see it the same way I see it.
And I can identify with a word and you will not be able to identify with it.
We all see things differently.
And that's the beauty of it.
Where do we bridge that so that we can understand each other?
If you're not able to see what I see or I'm not able to see what you see, how do we come together?
And that to me...
I'll tell you what my philosophy is.
We're only here in this life to love and to forgive.
That's all.
That's where I'm at now.
Where I was 50 years ago is a totally different person than I am today.
So...
I think, well, I mean, your kind of description or understanding of what mestizo mestizaje is.
It's pretty consistent with most people.
But I'm wondering, like, where do you think you learned about that?
Was it something that you learned from being a part of the Chicano movement?
Or was it something that you were aware of?
before that no yeah i i it would have to be with the chicano movement is is we were trying to identify who we were uh um you know identity is something that is always it's in constant flux because we're always re reinventing ourselves we're re-identifying who we are i'm not 20 years old
And that's an identity that you establish or when you're 30 or when you're 40 or when you're 50 or when you get to 70, you know.
Each one has its own identity, and you identify with seniors.
I identify with seniors now.
What can I say?
I identify with Michael Males.
We're on a spiritual path.
We're on a spiritual journey.
I think I've always been on a spiritual journey my whole life.
I know when I was 16 years old, I wanted to become a nun.
Now, it's a dying breed.
No one is...
Anyway, it's your identity when you're at, at your age and time.
Mestizo is something I learned when I was in my 20s.
It was something that I could identify with.
It was something that I could appreciate in that time.
Does it identify me now?
Not necessarily.
What I identify now is just living on this planet.
Mm-hmm.
taking care of this planet, taking care of my loved ones, being... Some of the philosophies, especially Mayan scholars, that in the 80s when we were learning and having these class sessions, and I'm sure you're
Your mom and dad told you about what we were learning then.
Some Mayan principles, which are indigenous in Lakesh, and now everyone is using it.
You know, menya, that term, you know, to create, to love, to believe, to create, to do with love and pain, that's work, and that's menya.
Is that like M-E-N... How do you spell that?
Menya.
M-E-N-Y-A-H.
And you know, Inlakesh, you are my other self.
If I love and respect you, I love and respect myself.
If I do harm to you, I do harm to myself.
And that's such a universal principle in any religion.
And...
For me, religion is separate from spirituality because religion can contain your spirit.
It tries and it thinks it does, but it doesn't.
Your spirit is free.
It's your own.
No one can take that away from you.
No one can tell you how to believe, when to believe, who to believe.
But, you know, if I love and respect you,
I can love and respect myself.
If I do harm to you, I can do harm to myself.
So, you know, these are really strong indigenous principles that we learn then and still apply to me now because they're truths that never change.
So... So are you tying that into, like, the... Yes.
Becoming aware that we have in our beings that we have this history and this identity that relates to these kinds of principles.
Exactly.
Okay.
And that still apply.
To me, those apply more than the term Chicano because that in itself will, whether it'll be...
An asterisk in somebody's history book.
In the same way, Latina X will be an asterisk in somebody's history book.
Yeah.
But the deep, profound teachings will never be an asterisk.
Because those are really, I mean, to me, they speak the truth.
They have spoken to the truth from then to now.
Mm-hmm.
That's interesting.
My dad and I were just talking about this yesterday that you know this idea that that there is a profound or there's a profound connection to our indigenous roots and spiritualities and
and ways of knowing things and that you know all this other stuff all this you know it's very kind of like performative or symbol symbolism right the naming the language stuff but that what is more important is that these lessons these values remain right or i mean that's the hope is that those things remain um that that is the actual kind of like prize not
you know, are we being recognized for being Latinx or whatever, right?
So, yeah, I think that's really, really interesting.
The mestizo stuff, so you said that you kind of became more aware of it in your 20s, right?
Right, that was, we were doing Dominguez Martinez Paredes is a Mayan scholar who wrote about, who had about
10 books that were given to him by the mascarones when we were doing interchange with them, with Mariano Leyva.
And that's how Luis came across these books.
And so they were all in Spanish.
Of course, no one here, no one in our group was really into Spanish and reading.
Well, I mean, you know, these are scholarly books in Spanish.
Right.
And so it was Louise who read them and interpreted them for us and taught them to us.
And it was one of those, you know, when we were here in San Juan at the very beginning in the participation, we used to have nightly classes in our home, where Louise would conduct kind of like history lessons for the group, which would introduce a lot.
We even did Babaran Das's book,
the gospel of St.
John, according to Bob Arondas, it's an existential way out.
He was into
LSD and stuff like that.
So he was way out there.
But anyway, we studied different philosophies and stuff.
But that's when we were introduced to Dominguez Parezo.
And Inlakesh and Menya and Naviolin and Olteo.
And part of the workshop that was established is the Theater of the Sphere, which was dealing with...
indigenous, um, the Vente Pasos, uh, in the Aztec calendar, uh, uh, can describe the heart, the mind, the soul, and we did exercises to develop those things, um, which actually still are being practiced, um, which could, you know, that, um,
We want to, there's, Luis has put a workshop book together and, and it should be published at one point and probably will.
I don't know when, but, um, actually he, he's written.
Oh, that's enough.
He can tell you that.
Oh, there he is.
You're up.
Hello.
Good morning.
Oh, afternoon.
I don't know what it is.
Morning.
Good to see you.
You having a good conversation?
Yeah, actually we are.
So that guy, I'll ask Luis, I'll ask him a little bit more, but the Paredes guy is Paredes?
Yeah, Paredes.
So he was a Mayan scholar.
Oh, a Mayan scholar?
Yeah.
Okay.
But from Mexico.
From Mexico, yeah.
And he's passed away.
Somebody told us recently that somebody published these books under their personal
name rather than they oh really yeah because you know he he was kicked out of the university because of his his his ideas and of course you know they always look at the white anthropologist right the Mexican anthropologist you know yeah so anyway his ideas were fully that is a that is a big problem and still a problem in academia
um okay that's good uh let me see if there was anything else i wanted to ask oh um okay so you told me that you kind of you learned about some of this stuff in in your 20s and do you know like so it's interesting because you're talking about there that you guys would have some kind of a
Like a learning group or a learning circle or something like that, right?
Where you would read books and learn about stuff.
And so can you recall where you learned about mestizaje or mestizo?
Well, it was part of this.
With the sessions that we had at night and the workshops that we did.
So applying...
the methodology of what was in the books and incorporating them into a workshop so that we could
you know, we'd have, and doing the theater of the sphere, we use a soccer ball in order to represent the sphere and the movements, and our whole body is a sphere as we move our heads, our arms, our legs, and so just identifying, looking more into your internal soul, and this beating heart of us, you know.
exercises where we use the ball as part of the exercises being our heart and bringing it to somebody else it's these gestures are so profound if you it's like whatever you put into you know whatever you put into your studies whatever you put into your work whatever it is that you do if you invest your whole nature your whole self into it
you get so much more out of it than just sitting there and saying, oh, God, when is this going to be over?
Rather than invest, you know, when it is that you're doing.
So I think all of these, you know, sessions that we had in the evening to study mind philosophy, the workshops that we did, were all really integrated in the work that we did.
Mm-hmm.
Was there, out of, so you're talking a lot about like the Mayan kind of, the Mayan principles.
Do you recall any specifically Mestizaje principles, Mestizo?
Well, I, you know, if you have done a Mestizo with anything, Mestizo is a combination, it's like a whole,
pot that you put in your Mexican and your indigenous and you put whatever it is you do your your lineage you can you can you can say you're scotinavian you can say whatever any any your blood whatever your blood comes from all um where do you what is it that you intuitively know
What, when will you say something, when you say, ah, you have an epiphany and say, yes, I understand it completely or no, I don't understand any of it.
It has makes no sense whatsoever.
And sometimes it's your gut that informs you and tells you, yes, this is, this is what I believe this is.
Yeah.
And beliefs change.
I think I'm thinking more like, because we had talked about Corky's poem, right?
And there's a lot in Corky's poem that talks about, you know, this new, the Chicano that is born from the Spanish conqueror and the indigenous, you know,
owner of this land, basically.
And so I was just wondering, did you guys read that?
Was that part of that circle?
Or was it somebody else, like a Vasconcelos, because you were reading Mexican literature and stuff?
Well, Vasconcelos is something that I didn't read, so I can't talk about that.
What we did study was Domingo Martinez Carreras.
But not, I mean, there wasn't much written in those days.
There wasn't resource materials that you could go to.
Not like you have today.
So even literature, Chicano literature, wasn't prevalent and it wasn't published.
If you needed to find anything, you'd have to talk to them personally.
Yeah.
in order to get some poems or whatever.
It's like the early pieces in La Raza and Dan Steiner and the book that Mestizo, which is what it's called.
Anyway, it was like the great frontier in those days.
There was nothing.
So you sort of had to
reinvent everything or create things for yourself in order to do it and it's still the same thing now i mean it hasn't changed except now that you know media has taken a dominant force you know the internet the social media i mean that's where you get all your information now yeah whereas before there was no cell phones there were no
you know, where you can say, oh, I have to find out what this means, Google it.
Right, right.
So now it's like, we take this for granted that it's always been there.
It was, I can understand why, you know, when the great coming, you know, across, you know, to California, how just going across the
It just, it's boggles the mind to think that there was nothing, especially in those days, nothing really about Chicanos that was written.
I think we kind of created that, coined it and made it popular.
Yeah.
Um, I think actually I do have one kind of like main question I want to get through before we take a break.
We kind of wrap up here.
Yeah.
Um,
So one of the things that I heard both my mom and dad say about mestizaje was that whether they identified with it or not, was that it was something that
just seemed to be like common sense or like a general understanding within the Mexican community.
So that it wasn't necessarily, oh, somebody came and they wrote a lecture on mestizaje and they distributed it to everybody, but that it was something that people just as a community, being Mexican-American, Chicano, whatever,
that there was some sort of like an understanding about it.
Well, you know, when you... So that when you encountered it later or, you know, in your 20s, that it somehow resonated.
Well, I think, you know, growing up, you know, in like we, you know, in the San Joaquin Valley and growing up in the history that we have, you know,
There was no such thing as identifying with the Mexican side of your life.
I mean, other than that you grew up in the barrio.
It's like a piece of clay that still hasn't formed yet.
We were really just a lump of clay that we're sort of looking into and creating something out of nothing because it was nothing other than being Mexican and being Mexican-American.
And being Mexican-American, the connotation was that if you were Mexican-American, you were a salab, meaning that you didn't identify with your own people.
which is kind of the same thing that's happening now because you have a lot of Latinos or Mexicanos that identify with Trump, and you say, how can you think that way?
Where is your mentality?
It's kind of the same way where people who identify being Mexican-American, you said those were the ones that wanted to assimilate into the dominant culture and become the other.
So when you became self-aware that, you know, things weren't as equitable as you thought they were, that there was a lot of discrimination and racism even then.
Yeah.
I can remember a time when my father in Arosi, when we went to the football field, there was an event taking place, and being a little kid, I was hungry, and
They were giving away hot dogs as an incentive for whatever.
I don't remember.
I was still too young.
And I remember being there with my dad and I say, I want to eat away.
So he went up to the concession stand and asked in his broken English or, or in Spanish.
I can remember that his daughter was hungry.
And that woman saying, do you see that sign?
It says not until six o'clock denying
Like, can't you speak English?
Don't you read?
It's always happened.
It's always been there.
So you grew up with that racism.
You stayed with your own class.
You stayed with your own people.
You didn't go anywhere that you didn't belong.
Even when I was in high school, I remember there was this young Anglo...
boy that had a well i i don't know he had a crush on me or what but he made it obvious that he was interested in me and i just could not
identify with yeah um so you see it's all internal too we we do we we we internalize that racism ourselves i didn't think i was racist but at the same time i didn't feel like i could identify with the other person so we have that anyway but i think growing up is is we saw enough of it to say something's not right here i don't want to be like that person
I don't want to deny a little kid something to eat because your father can't speak English or can't read or whatever.
But it was the tone of voice and the attitude that I'll never forget, even to this day.
So those things are so embedded in you so that when you start saying, well, I can be proud to be Mexican.
I can say, I'm...
You know, I'm a human being with, you know.
Dignity.
Yeah, with dignity.
So, so you, you grow up, when you grow up that way, you say, you know what?
Things have to change.
If not for you, I mean, if for them, for you yourself, so that you don't become a racist yourself, so that you can treat others.
That's why.
Exactly.
It's that, you know, when something like that comes, um,
I mean, even Christ in this, yeah, I can't tell if I'm with the, the, uh, well, anyway, uh, it's, it's, it's, it's all in, it's a, actually it's universal in all spiritual, but not, I don't want, I hate religion.
I hate the idea.
Like the institution of it.
Yeah.
The spiritual concepts have always been there.
with everyone, whether you're Islam or, you know, with Buddha, with Jesus, with anyone else.
They all have the same basic principle.
Treat others with respect and love as the way you want to be treated.
So when you hear that concept, you say, that's my life.
That's what I want to live.
And this is the way I want to be treated, and this is the way I want to treat others.
Mm-hmm.
so um and it's you know it's difficult uh i think like i said earlier i think we really are here only to i mean i'm a disciple of course of miracles i don't know you ever heard of it anyway it's um it's one of my spiritual teachings now and it really is just a question of
If all we're here to do is to love and to forgive, you know, it's very difficult to forgive.
You hold on to it.
And, you know, you learn that forgiveness isn't about the other person.
It's about yourself.
Because who you resent lives in your mind.
It doesn't live in the other person.
The resentment you carry it has nothing to do with it.
you internalize it, you hold it.
They hold a space in your mind.
So what I've learned to do is that when I feel resentment towards somebody, I pray for them.
And all of a sudden, it doesn't happen overnight, but in time, I don't feel that resentment anymore.
But we all have to do our own work.
No one can do it for you.
So if anything, I've learned that, that you have to take care of yourself.
They say you have to put the oxygen mask on yourself before you can help anybody else.
And for the longest time, growing up in an alcoholic home, I always thought, I was always afraid the shoe would always drop.
You know, things were going well, something terrible is going to happen, or your self-esteem is so low, your self-worth is so low, because you're always living in fear.
Fear has this dominant...
stranglehold on you and that's the disease of alcoholism that's the disease of addiction so it's i didn't go to l and i to help whoever i went i ended up helping myself and that's what i learned i had to take care of myself first if i could take care of anybody else and i have to work on myself i can't i can't they say i i didn't cause it i can't control it i can't cure it
And that's about everybody.
Yeah.
Um, since we were kind of talking about spirituality, uh, another thing I was curious about is whether you, um, like, and, and this also goes to that question about just kind of like messy side being this, this kind of general thing in the air of, um,
the Chicano or the Mexican American community is like its connection or representation in the Virgen de Guadalupe.
And I was just curious if you, like, how do you understand her?
Do you see her as a mestizo or as an Indian?
You know, it's interesting because I have a,
We have Michael Males, I call him, we meet every Saturday morning and we share our little spiritual, you know, daily readings and stuff.
But they're all followers.
We're all followers of the weekend.
And I'm not so... There are some that, you know...
Your belief in a power greater than itself applies to anything.
It could be the region of Guadalupe.
It could be Christ.
It could be God.
It could be a plant.
It could be whatever it is.
Social justice.
Anything greater than yourself.
So where you place that belief is where it is the strongest.
And for me, I don't believe in a gender in God.
It's not a white male, and it's God is just spirit.
The vegan is just spirit.
These are just mortal shells that we carry.
You know, who we are is not what you see here in the outside.
It's what's inside, and we're all the same inside.
What we do, what we feed our spirit, that's who we are.
If we feed anger and resentment, it's reflected.
in us so for the Virgin of Guadalupe she's an icon like Buddha like Jesus that has for me an equal part as everyone else it's not something that I hold higher even though I have images that's an old painting from a great friend but
And so, yeah, so she holds a place on that altar like all people.
Yeah.
But I think, I mean, there's something to be said of how you experience her, right, as an equal to these other kind of spiritual figures or what have you.
And then there's something to be said of the image.
Mm-hmm.
and how she is portrayed in art or the story, or even in your guys' play, The Vidhin and the Tipayak.
So I was just curious if being familiar with The Vidhin was something that maybe prepared you
for when you were introduced or understood what Mestizaje was later in your 20s, do you see a connection between staring at that image and then learning about something like Mestizaje and then eventually like these things as well?
You know, it's interesting because growing up, we didn't have the Vita de Guadalupe in our house.
Not like she is present in a lot of homes, especially in America.
We grew up with El Santo Nino de Atoche.
This is my mom's.
The Santo Nino is from Zacatecas.
And it's actually, the Santo Nino is a child, Christ, that went into the prison.
Anyway, we grew up in our home with Santo Nino.
So I didn't find one with Santo Nino.
The Virgin was something that was introduced to me later in life.
It was actually, it was not in my, it wasn't, the saints that we had in church in Cutler were not the Virgin of Guadalupe.
If she was, she was delegated somewhere, you know, but there was images, the statues that I can remember seeing of,
Lady of Fatima
Other images.
The Virgin Mary.
But it wasn't.
Do you think, like, did you see that change since maybe like the UFW march?
Because they're holding her banner.
They're leading the march with her banner, right?
I'm talking about my childhood.
Right, right, right, right.
And when I was introduced to the Vigen, I was really here with the Teatro.
And it wasn't until then that I, you know, that she's become like a symbol for a lot of Mexicanos.
And I can understand that, but growing up, there was no strong... Your grandma never really... No, my grandma, I don't think she was.
But my mom did say... My mom said that Grandma Bisabuela was a Guadalupano.
Yeah.
They were Guadalupe in Cutler, but it was more like a social club.
They have tarliadas on the weekends and, you know, they're so... Jameicas.
Jameicas.
But, you know, as far as being...
You know, now I think that Virgen has been placed in center stage, whereas before she was just the mother of Christ.
So Christ was always the dominant figure.
And like I said, they're all equal to me now.
There's no one that this is above or superior or identify solely on her, identify her as an equal partner.
Mm-hmm.
you know, as we should all be equal partners in life.
Yeah.
You know, not one more than the other, not, I think we contain both feminine and masculine in us.
I don't think inside of me, it says that I'm solely just a woman, but I'm also a man, you know, I, the, the idea that somehow, um,
I want to feel that we're equal in both sense, so that I can't dislike the male side in me, or the feminine side in me, in the same way that Davidian and Christ and all the other figures are one and the same.
Yeah, that's good.
I'm pretty much done with my question.
Is there anything else you want to add?
Leave for posterity?
What do I leave?
No, you know, what do I want?
You know, life is ever-changing.
And that I think we're here on a river just flowing through.
And sometimes we can go into heavy currents.
But learning just to maintain a balance in life.
I think it's important, important for me anyway.
My greatest is to really treat others as the way I want to be treated.
I truly believe that that's the true message for all of us.
That's about it.
All right.
Good.
Thank you very much.